# Klipp-Linding Lab

[← Back to list](../README.md#humboldt-universität-zu-berlin)

## DisEMBL (DisEMBL-dis465, DisEMBL-disHL)

### DisEMBL Abstract
A great challenge in the proteomics and structural genomics era is to predict protein structure and function, including identification of those proteins that are partially or wholly unstructured. Disordered regions in proteins often contain short linear peptide motifs (e.g., SH3 ligands and targeting signals) that are important for protein function. We present here DisEMBL, a computational tool for prediction of disordered/unstructured regions within a protein sequence. As no clear definition of disorder exists, we have developed parameters based on several alternative definitions and introduced a new one based on the concept of "hot loops," i.e., coils with high temperature factors. Avoiding potentially disordered segments in protein expression constructs can increase expression, foldability, and stability of the expressed protein. DisEMBL is thus useful for target selection and the design of constructs as needed for many biochemical studies, particularly structural biology and structural genomics projects. The tool is freely available via a web interface (http://dis.embl.de) and can be downloaded for use in large-scale studies.(⚠️ for DisEMBL, 2003)

### DisEMBL Model/Method
Ensemble of five artificial neural networks trained on each the three data sets: i) loops/coils as defined by DSSP; ii) Hot loops, a refined subset of the above with a high degree of mobility based on Cα temperature factors (B factors) using Smith et al., 2003 scales; iii) Missing coordinates in X-Ray structure as defined by remark465 entries in PDB. Artificial neural networks were trained on symmetric sequence windows centered at the position to be predicted. All neural networks were trained with a learning rate of 0.005. The size of these windows was systematically varied from 3 to 51 residues. For each window size the number of hidden units was varied in the range 5–50. The performance of every such combination was evaluated by 5-fold cross-validation and best parameter combinations were selected based on ROC curves. Window 19 and 30 hidden units for the coils predictor. 41 residues and 5 hidden neurons for the hot-loops. 21 residues and 30 hidden units for the remark465. The score distributions of positive and negative test examples were estimated using Gaussian kernel density estimation. For coil prediction a prior probability of 43% (the composition of the training data set) was used while a prior probability of 20% was used in the case of hot loop prediction.