# Bin Liu LAB

[← Back to list](../README.md#beijing-institute-of-technology-北京理工大学)

## DeepIDP-2L

### DeepIDP-2L Abstract
Intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) are widely distributed in proteins. Accurate prediction of IDRs is critical for the protein structure and function analysis. The IDRs are divided into long disordered regions (LDRs) and short disordered regions (SDRs) according to their lengths. Previous studies have shown that LDRs and SDRs have different proprieties. However, the existing computational methods fail to extract different features for LDRs and SDRs separately. As a result, they achieve unstable performance on datasets with different ratios of LDRs and SDRs.

For the convenience of most experimental scientists, a user-friendly and publicly accessible web-server for the new predictor has been established at http://bliulab.net/DeepIDP-2L/. It is anticipated that DeepIDP-2L will become a very useful tool for identification of intrinsically disordered regions.

### DeepIDP-2L Model/Method
In this study, a two-layer predictor was proposed called DeepIDP-2L. In the first layer, two kinds of attention-based models are used to extract different features for LDRs and SDRs, respectively. The hierarchical attention network is used to capture the distribution pattern features of LDRs, and convolutional attention network is used to capture the local correlation features of SDRs. The second layer of DeepIDP-2L maps the feature extracted in the first layer into a new feature space. Convolutional network and bidirectional long short term memory are used to capture the local and long-range information for predicting both SDRs and LDRs. Experimental results show that DeepIDP-2L can achieve more stable performance than other exiting predictors on independent test sets with different ratios of SDRs and LDRs.
  
DeepIDP-2L is a two-layer predictor. In the first layer, two kinds of attention-based models are used to extract different features for LDRs and SDRs, respectively. The hierarchical attention network (HAN) is used to capture the distribution pattern features of LDRs, and convolutional attention network (CAN) is used to capture the local correlation features of SDRs. The second layer of DeepIDP-2L maps the feature extracted in the first layer into a new feature space. Convolutional network (CNN) and bidirectional long short term memory (Bi-LSTM) are employed to capture the local and long-range information for predicting both SDRs and LDRs.

## DisoFLAG

### DisoFLAG Abstract
Intrinsically disordered proteins and regions (IDPs/IDRs) are functionally important proteins and regions that exist as highly dynamic conformations under natural physiological conditions. IDPs/IDRs exhibit a broad range of molecular functions, and their functions involve binding interactions with partners and remaining native structural flexibility. The rapid increase in the number of proteins in sequence databases and the diversity of disordered functions challenge existing computational methods for predicting protein intrinsic disorder and disordered functions. A disordered region interacts with different partners to perform multiple functions, and these disordered functions exhibit different dependencies and correlations. In this study, we introduce DisoFLAG, a computational method that leverages a graph-based interaction protein language model (GiPLM) for jointly predicting disorder and its multiple potential functions. GiPLM integrates protein semantic information based on pre-trained protein language models into graph-based interaction units to enhance the correlation of the semantic representation of multiple disordered functions. The DisoFLAG predictor takes amino acid sequences as the only inputs and provides predictions of intrinsic disorder and six disordered functions for proteins, including protein-binding, DNA-binding, RNA-binding, ion-binding, lipid-binding, and flexible linker. We evaluated the predictive performance of DisoFLAG following the Critical Assessment of protein Intrinsic Disorder (CAID) experiments, and the results demonstrated that DisoFLAG offers accurate and comprehensive predictions of disordered functions, extending the current coverage of computationally predicted disordered function categories. The standalone package and web server of DisoFLAG have been established to provide accurate prediction tools for intrinsic disorders and their associated functions.

### DisoFLAG Model/Method
DisoFLAG, a computational method that leverages a graph-based interaction protein language model (GiPLM) for jointly predicting disorder and its multiple potential functions. GiPLM integrates protein semantic information based on pre-trained protein language models into graph-based interaction units to enhance the correlation of the semantic representation of multiple disordered functions. The DisoFLAG predictor takes amino acid sequences as the only inputs and provides predictions of intrinsic disorder and six disordered functions for proteins, including protein-binding, DNA-binding, RNA-binding, ion-binding, lipid-binding, and flexible linker.

## IDP-Fusion

### IDP-Fusion Abstract
Intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) are widely distributed in proteins and related to many important biological functions. Accurately identifying IDRs is of great significance for protein structure and function analysis. Because the long disordered regions (LDRs) and short disordered regions (SDRs) share different characteristics, the existing predictors fail to achieve better and more stable performance on datasets with different ratios between LDRs and SDRs. There are two main reasons. First, the existing predictors construct network structures based on their own experiences such as convolutional neural network (CNN) which is used to extract the feature of neighboring residues in protein, and long short-term memory (LSTM) is used to extract the long-distance dependencies feature of protein residues. But these networks cannot capture the hidden feature associated with the length-dependent between residues. Second, many algorithms based on deep learning have been proposed but the complementarity of the existing predictors is not fully explored and used.

In this study, the neural architecture search (NAS) algorithm was employed to automatically construct the network structures so as to capture the hidden features in protein sequences. In order to stably predict both the LDRs and SDRs, the model constructed by NAS was combined with length-dependent models for capturing the unique features of SDRs or LDRs and general models for capturing the common features between LDRs and SDRs. A new predictor called IDP-Fusion was proposed.

Experimental results showed that IDP-Fusion can achieve more stable performance than the other existing predictors on independent test sets with different ratios between SDRs and LDRs.

### IDP-Fusion Model/Method
IDP-Fusion combines six base predictors. The features between these predictors are complementary. Furthermore, the base method using neural architecture search method DARTS can capture the hidden features failed to be captured by the other models. During the training process, IDP-Fusion considers the influence of different ratios between SDR proteins and LDR proteins by using the multi-objective genetic ensemble algorithm and therefore, IDP-Fusion achieves stable performance on different independent test datasets.