# Julius Schlensok LAB

⚠️ Not sure if he is a PI

[← Back to list](../README.md#technical-university-of-munich)


## UdonPred 

### UdonPred Abstract
N/A


### UdonPred Model/Method
UdonPred is a predictive model for protein disorder, leveraging embeddings from the pre-trained protein language model ProstT5. This model variant has been trained using a novel dataset of NMR spectroscopy chemical shifts and fine-tuned on DisProt.

Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are a unique class of proteins that lack a fixed or rigid three-dimensional structure under physiological conditions. They are pivotal in various biological processes, including signal transduction, transcriptional regulation, and cell-cycle control. The study of IDPs is crucial as their disorder is often linked to diseases such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases, and neurodegenerative disorders. While the advancement in computational methods has significantly enhanced the study of IDPs, many predictors available are limited by a shortage of high-quality disorder annotations. To improve upon existing methods, UdonPred uses a new dataset based on the TriZOD scoring scheme that assigns continuous disorder scores (G-scores) to residues based on nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy chemical shifts in the entire Biological Magnetic Resonance Data Bank (BMRB), assessing how much experimentally determined chemical shifts deviate from random coil chemical shifts. Based on this new dataset of over 15k peptides (10 times as large as the previously published CheZOD dataset), we trained slim neural networks to predict TriZOD G-scores from embeddings generated by the pre-trained protein language model (pLM) ProstT5. Needing only the information present in these embeddings, UdonPred itself is extremely fast and can predict per-residue disorder scores for a protein in a matter of milliseconds on a consumer-grade CPU. UdonPred can successfully predict disorder from per-residue pLM embeddings: Evaluation on the commonly used OdinPred test set of 117 proteins exhibits promising results. With an area under the ROC curve (AUROC) of 0.907±0.01 between TriZOD G-scores predicted by UdonPred and manually computed binary CheZOD Z-scores, UdonPred is competitive with other state-of-the-art disorder predictors.