# Silvio C. E. Tosatto Lab

[← Back to list](../README.md#university-of-padua)

## AlphaFold-disorder

### AlphaFold-disorder Abstract
Intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) defying the traditional protein structure-function paradigm have been difficult to analyze. The availability of accurate structure predictions on a large scale in AlphaFoldDB offers a fresh perspective on IDR prediction. Here, we establish three baselines for IDR prediction from AlphaFoldDB models based on the recent CAID dataset. Surprisingly, AlphaFoldDB is highly competitive for predicting both IDRs and conditionally folded binding regions, demonstrating the plasticity of the disorder to structure continuum.

### AlphaFold-disorder Model/Method
AlphaFold-disorder generates its predictions using the AlphaFold structure as input, the method generates three outputs. i) AlphaFold-disorder provides disorder propability as 1 - pLDDT and the default threshold is 0.312 (representing pLDDT <68.8%), optimized by maximizing the F1-Score performance on the CAID-1 DisProt dataset. ii) AlphaFold-RSA predicts as disordered those residues with a high solvent accessible surface. The relative solvent accessibility (RSA) is calculated over a local window (25 residues). The optimal classification threshold for AlphaFold-RSA is 0.581. iii) AlphaFold-binding Visual inspection also shows that some “ribbon” regions have high RSA yet retain some local secondary structure and have a relatively high pLDDT score, suggesting the possibility to act as disordered binding regions. The combination of both features is used to identify regions with a tendency to be simultaneously accessible (RSA) and structured (pLDDT), which may indicate disordered binding regions or conditional folding. (AlphaFold-binding is not for disorder prediction).

In short, Disorder and binding region detection from AlphaFold predicted structures. The script parses and processes PDB files generated by AlphaFold. It expects the pLDDT score in the B-factor column. As intermediate (mandatory) step it calculates the Relative Solvent Accessibility (RSA) as provided by DSSP and BioPython.

## AlphaFold3-disorder

### AlphaFold3-disorder Abstract
N/A

### AlphaFold3-disorder Model/Method
See AlphaFold-disorder above. In this case structures are not download from AlphaFoldDB but generated manually from the AlphaFold3 web server.

## ESpritz
 
### ESpritz Abstract
Intrinsically disordered regions are key for the function of numerous proteins, and the scant available experimental annotations suggest the existence of different disorder flavors. While efficient predictions are required to annotate entire genomes, most existing methods require sequence profiles for disorder prediction, making them cumbersome for high-throughput applications.
  
ESpritz predicts three flavors of disorder at two distinct false positive rates, either with a fast or slower and slightly more accurate approach. Given its state-of-the-art performance, it can be especially useful for high-throughput applications.

Both a web server for high-throughput analysis and a Linux executable version of ESpritz are available from: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/espritz/.

### ESpritz Model/Method
In this work, we present an ensemble of protein disorder predictors called ESpritz. These are based on bidirectional recursive neural networks and trained on three different flavors of disorder, including a novel NMR flexibility predictor. ESpritz can produce fast and accurate sequence-only predictions, annotating entire genomes in the order of hours on a single processor core. Alternatively, a slower but slightly more accurate ESpritz variant using sequence profiles can be used for applications requiring maximum performance. Two levels of prediction confidence allow either to maximize reasonable disorder detection or to limit expected false positives to 5%. ESpritz performs consistently well on the recent CASP9 data, reaching a Sw measure of 54.82 and area under the receiver operator curve of 0.856. The fast predictor is four orders of magnitude faster and remains better than most publicly available CASP9 methods, making it ideal for genomic scale predictions.

ESpritz: is based on a machine learning method which does not require sliding windows or any complex sources of information (Bi-directional Recursive Neural Networks (BRNN)). Learning proceeds by extracting the relevant information from the local context of the residue under consideration using the BRNN. The algorithm used for training was gradient descent and the backpropagation through structure algorithm. There are three types of disorder data corresponding to three different ESpritz models: X - derived from missing residues in X-ray PDB chains (1 May 2008) of length between 25 and 2,000 amino acids, resolution at least 2.5 Å and R-factor up to 25%. Sequence identity reduced with UniqueProt to an HSSP value of 0 and using the -m option to give priority to proteins with better quality. The resulting lists were merged and redundancy reduced in a similar manner leaving proteins with disordered regions as a priority. D - Each DisProt (release 5.7) entry was matched to PDB entries via the UniProtKB accession. DisProt takes preference over missing residues. N - NMR mobility/flexibility is calculated using the Mobi server. Mobi is based on a simple algorithm to find regions with different conformations among all the models. The extraction and redundancy reduction is identical to the X-ray data collection except no quality filters are considered.

## MobiDB-lite

### MobiDB-lite Abstract
Intrinsic disorder (ID) is established as an important feature of protein sequences. Its use in proteome annotation is however hampered by the availability of many methods with similar performance at the single residue level, which have mostly not been optimized to predict long ID regions of size comparable to domains.

Here, we have focused on providing a single consensus-based prediction, MobiDB-lite, optimized for highly specific (i.e. few false positive) predictions of long disorder. The method uses eight different predictors to derive a consensus which is then filtered for spurious short predictions. Consensus prediction is shown to outperform the single methods when annotating long ID regions. MobiDB-lite can be useful in large-scale annotation scenarios and has indeed already been integrated in the MobiDB, DisProt and InterPro databases.

MobiDB-lite is available as part of the MobiDB database from URL: http://mobidb.bio.unipd.it/. An executable can be downloaded from URL: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/mobidblite/.


### MobiDB-lite Model/Method
The implementation of MobiDB-lite involves two consecutive steps. In the first step, MobiDB-lite makes use of multiple prediction methods, including three variants of ESpritz, two variants of IUpred, DisEMBL and GlobPlot. The consensus is obtained by combining the results of at least 5 out of 8 methods. The second step involves refining the consensus to remove spurious regions of disorder within ordered regions and vice versa. The refinement process includes an iterative filtering step that eliminates short stretches of up to three residues of ID within ordered regions and vice versa. ID stretches flanked by ordered stretches (max 3 residues) are converted to order and vice versa. Structured stretches of up to 10 consecutive residues are then converted to ID only if they are flanked by two disordered regions of at least 20 residues. Finally, a length cutoff is applied to ID regions, and only those of at least 20 residues are kept.

## MobiDB-lite 4.0

### MobiDB-lite 4.0 Abstract
In recent years, many disorder predictors have been developed to identify intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) in proteins, achieving high accuracy. However, it may be difficult to interpret differences in predictions across methods. Consensus methods offer a simple solution, highlighting reliable predictions while filtering out uncertain positions. Here, we present a new version of MobiDB-lite, a consensus method designed to predict long IDRs and classify them based on compositional biases and conformational properties.

MobiDB-lite 4.0 pipeline was optimized to be ten times faster than the previous version. It now provides compactness annotations based on predicted apparent scaling exponent. The newly added features and disorder subclassifications allow the users to get a comprehensive insight into the protein’s function and characteristics. MobiDB-lite 4.0 is integrated into the MobiDB and DisProt databases. A version without the compactness predictor is integrated into InterProScan, propagating MobiDB-lite annotations to UniProtKB.
  
The MobiDB-lite 4.0 source code and a Docker container are available from the GitHub repository: https://github.com/BioComputingUP/MobiDB-lite.


### MobiDB-lite 4.0 Model/Method
MobiDB-lite is a Python program designed to generate a consensus prediction of intrinsically disordered regions in proteins. The consensus is generated by measuring predictors agreement where at least 5/8 of predictors must agree to assign disorder state to a residue. A mathematical morphology (MM) dilation/erosion processing is applied to smooth the prediction and short regions are filtered out.

The code is integrated into the InterProScan software. The MobiDB-lite output is available in the MobiDB, InterPro, PDBe, PDBe-KB and UniProtKB databases.

This version of MobiDB has been developed in collaboration with Matthias Blum who optimized its execution time by 10 times. Matthias' version is available [here](https://github.com/matthiasblum/idrpred) (and called IDRPred).
